Benchmarks.jl
=============

A package to make Julia benchmarking both easy and rigorous. See the design
section for details about what we mean by rigor.

# Basic Usage Example

For basic benchmarking, you can use the `@benchmark` macro, which takes
in a Julia function call expression and returns the results of benchmarking that
expression:

```jl
using Benchmarks

@benchmark sin(2.0)

@benchmark sum(rand(1000))

@benchmark rand(1:100)

@benchmark (3.0+5im)^3.2

@benchmark svd(rand(10, 10))
```

The `@benchmark` macro will repeatedly call the function many times in order to
rigorously estimate its actual execution time (see below for more details). It
is designed to test the performance of a single function as a complementary
tool alongside `@code_warntype` and `@code_llvm`. To this end, all arguments to
the benchmarked function are evaluated before benchmarking it; they are
considered setup. This means that, unlike the builtin `@time` macro,
`@benchmark sum(rand(1000))` will not include the time or allocations involved
in generating the 1000-length random vector. It also means that it will
repeatedly sum the same vector many times, so if there is additional variance
in the timings due to data dependence a single `@benchmark` call will not
uncover it.

# Advanced Usage Example

For more advanced usage (and for all automated usage), you need to use a
lower-level interface than the `@benchmark` macro. Here we give a minimal
example of that lower-level interface:

```jl
import Benchmarks

Benchmarks.@benchmarkable(
    sin_benchmark!, # benchmark name
    nothing,        # setup expression
    sin(2.0),       # benchmark "core"
    nothing         # teardown expression
)

r = Benchmarks.execute(sin_benchmark!)
```

In the design section, we'll describe the way that the lower-level interface
works.

# The Design of the Benchmarks Package

Benchmarking is hard. To do it well, you have to care about the details of how
code is executed and the statistical challenges that make it hard to generalize
correctly from benchmark data. To explain the rationale for design of the
package, we discuss the problems that the package is designed to solve.

## Measurement Error: Benchmarks that Measure the Wrong Thing

The first problem that the Benchmarks package tries to solve is the problem of
measurement error: benchmarking any expression that can be evaluated faster
than the system clock's resolution can track is vulnerable to measuring the
system clock's performance rather than the expression's performance. Naive
estimates, like those generated by the `@time` macro are often totally
inaccurate. To convince yourself, consider the following timings:

```jl
@time rand(100);

@time sum(rand(100));

@time sum(rand(100));
```

On my system, the results of this code often suggest that `sum(rand(100))` can
be evaluated faster than `rand(100)`. That's obviously absurd -- and the
timings returned by `@time` are unusably inaccurate for small functions like
these.

The reason for that inaccuracy is that summing 100 elements can occur much
faster than the system clock's finest resolution. As such, you're almost
exclusively measuring variability in the system clock when you evaluate `@time
sum(rand(100))`.

To deal with this, the Benchmarks package exploits a simple linear
relationship: evaluating an expression N times in a row should take
approximately N times as long as evaluating the same expression exactly 1
time. This linear relationship holds almost perfectly as N grows. Thus, we
solve the problem of measurement error by measuring the time it takes to
evaluate `sum` or `rand` a very large number of times. Then we apply linear
regression to estimate the time it takes to evaluate each function exactly once.

Since the `@benchmark` macro considers its arguments as setup, it detangles the
two operations. You can immediately see that summing is an order of magnitude
faster than the array and random number creation. If you'd like to measure the
two operations together, it's quite simple to create and benchmark a temporary
function:

```jl
f() = sum(rand(1000))
@benchmark f()
```

## Accounting for Variability

When you repeatedly evaluate the same expression, you find that the timings
you measure are not all the same. Instead, there is often substantial
variability across measurements.

Traditional statistical methods are often employed to resolve this problem. The
Benchmarks package tries to estimate the average time that it would take to
evaluate an expression. Because the average is estimated from a small sample
of measurements, we have to acknowledge that our estimate is uncertain. We
do this by reporting 95% confidence intervals (hereafter called CI's) for
the average time per evaluation.

## Constrained Budgets

Getting the best estimate of the average time requires gathering as many
samples as possible. Most people want their benchmarks to run in a finite
amount of time, so we need to impose some budget. The Benchmarks package
exposes both a sample budget and a time budget. For very long computations,
the time budget prevents the benchmarking process from taking more than 10s.
This can be configured.

For mid-range computations, we also allow users to insist on acquiring at most
100 samples. This can be effective if the time budget seems excessive for
the purpose of estimating CI's accurately.

For very fast computations that require OLS modeling, we ignore the samples
budget, although we respect the user's specificed time budget. This is because
users cannot reasonably expect to know how many samples they need to gather
to estimate the average time accurately.

## Dependence on External Resources

Sometimes we want to benchmark functions that depend upon external resources.
For example, we want to time how long it takes us to parse a file, which we
must first download.

To handle these scenarios, the `@benchmarkable` macro takes in three
expressions:

* `setup`: This expression will be evaluated once before the benchmark starts
      executing.
* `core`: This expression is the core expression we want to benchmark.
* `teardown`: This expression will be evaluated once after the core expression
      stops executing.

Note that it's not possible to affect the core's function arguments through the
setup or teardown expressions.

## Avoiding unwanted optimizations

A guiding design principle for the Benchmarks package is that it should measure
the function's performance as it would typically perform in real-world usage,
and do so as consistently as possible. Repeatedly calling a function many
thousands of times in a benchmarking loop, however, is not very typical. If we
are not careful in the design, LLVM may be able to perform optimizations that
interact with the benchmarking loop or remove it entirely.

In order to prevent unwanted optimizations, the `@benchmark` macro protects the
function call within an inner `@noinline` function. By preventing it from
inlining into the benchmarking loop, we force it to *always* make a function
call. This puts a bound on the minimum time resolution at one function call,
even if the benchmarked function does nothing and would otherwise take no time
at all:

```jl
julia> noop() = nothing
       @benchmark noop()
================ Benchmark Results ========================
     Time per evaluation: 3.04 ns [3.04 ns, 3.05 ns]
Proportion of time in GC: 0.00% [0.00%, 0.00%]
        Memory allocated: 0.00 bytes
   Number of allocations: 0 allocations
       Number of samples: 11701
   Number of evaluations: 139311001
         R² of OLS model: 0.997
 Time spent benchmarking: 0.53 s
```

Note that the `noop()` function call still inlines as it normally would into
the inner function; the above just represents the time it takes to execute one
iteration of a loop with just one function call.

Another difficulty is that Julia can sometimes perform constant-propagation
from a function's arguments to simplify the algorithms in its interior. As a
simple example, let's look at `1+2`. The `@code_llvm` macro shows that it adds
its arguments... but if we create a function where the arguments to `+` are
constant, it will inline and remove the addition entirely!

```llvm
julia> @code_llvm 1+2
define i64 @"julia_+_23345"(i64, i64) {
top:
  %2 = add i64 %1, %0
  ret i64 %2
}

julia> f() = 1+2
       @code_llvm f()
define i64 @julia_f_23346() {
top:
  ret i64 3
}
```

In general, we don't know whether a user wants to consider their arguments as
constants or not. In order to ensure that the behavior is always consistent, we
prevent this constant propagation through the function boundary. This typically
makes `@benchmark` behave as though it is executing the code displayed by
`@code_llvm`/`@code_native`.
